`@plone/scripts` addon command local clone and consolidate command (#3673)
plone/volto: packages/scripts/README.md

    Options:
      -p, --private          set if the repo is private, then GITHUB_TOKEN is used
      -b, --branch <branch>  set the repo branch, defaults to main
      -c, --canary           downloads latest Volto canary (alpha) version
      -h, --help             display help for command

This next command, would download the `volto-blocks-grid` add-on from its git repo, branch `main` and will generate a project with the latest Volto canary (alpha) version.

```shell
npx -p @plone/scripts addon clone https://github.com/kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid.git --branch main --canary
```

This will create a directory named `addon-testing-project` (this is a sensible default, but you can specify a custom one) and will bootstrap a new project using Volto's standard project generator.
It will adjust the configuration of this project to setup the add-on in the project using `mrs-developer` and the git URL given to fetch the add-on contents.
You can specify the branch to be used, if the project should use the latest alpha available.
There is an option for private repos as well, in that case, it will use the `GITHUB_TOKEN` present in your environment variables to fetch it.

> After this, as a developer you can use the usual project commands to run tests (unit, linting, acceptance) inside the generated addon-testing-project`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this, as a developer you can use the usual project commands to run tests (unit, linting, acceptance) inside the generated addon-testing-project`.
```
```suggestion
After this, as a developer you can use the usual project commands to run tests (unit, linting, acceptance) inside the generated addon-testing-project.
```

Author: Fixed.

You can configure the CI of your choice for automated testing, you can take a look at how it's done in: https://github.com/kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid/tree/main/.github/workflows

The idea is to issue commands inside the generated `addon-testing-project` project and do your checks.
Take special care on how to pass down to the `npx` command the current PR branch.

### clone local

You can also clone the local add-on using:

```shell
npx -p @plone/scripts addon clone .
```

This only works if you execute the command from the root of your add-on directory.

### consolidate

> It consolidates the changes made in the previously generated project with the `clone` command into the local add-on.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what that means. Can you say more about what it does / when I would want to use it?

Author: I improved the explanation all over the place. Sorry it was awful...

# @plone/scripts package

This package is a library of scripts that are useful to automate certain tasks when developing Volto core or Volto projects.

## i18n

> It scans and detects i18n messages from the code and add them to the i18n machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It scans and detects i18n messages from the code and adds them to the i18n machinery.
```

See https://6.dev-docs.plone.org/volto/recipes/i18n.html for more information.

> This script is installed in the `.bin` directory and can be called via `yarn i18n` or directly in the `scripts` `package.json` part.

Reviewer 2: Just a check, did you mean `.bin` as an invisible directory, or perhaps `./bin` as being in the working directory?

## changelogupdater

> It updates the changelog according the current defaults in the Volto project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It updates the change log according the current defaults in the Volto project.
```

> See how Volto core uses it along with `release-it` for automate the process:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See how Volto core uses it, along with `release-it`, to automate the release process:
```

https://github.com/plone/volto/blob/4f52bf61062d1e34e3391ed0a36781b8df98a316/package.json#L173-L192

### Bump

> Providing the version, you can update the first `unreleased` literal. `release-it` provides it as a `version` variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the version, you can update the first `unreleased` literal. `release-it` provides it as a `version` variable.
```

```shell
yarn changelogupdater bump ${version}
```

### Excerpt

> It generates the changelog of the version to be released. This is useful when creating the Release information and sending it to GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It generates the change log of the version to be released. This is useful when creating the Release information and sending it to GitHub.
```

```shell
yarn changelogupdater.js excerpt
```

### Back

> It creates the blank placeholder for the next release. Provided the (next) version, it will be added to the placeholder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It creates the blank placeholder for the next release. Given the (next) version, it will be added to the placeholder.
```

```shell
yarn changelogupdater.js back ${version}
```

## addon

> This script creates and configure a vanilla project using the Volto generator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This script creates and configures a vanilla project using the Volto generator.
```

The project is configured to have the current add-on installed and ready to work with.
This script is useful to bootstrap an isolated environment that can be used to quickly develop the add-on or for demo purposes.
It's also useful when testing an add-on in a CI environment.

```{note}
It's quite similar when you develop a Plone backend add-on in the Python side, and embed a ready to use Plone build (using buildout or pip) in order to develop and test the package.
```

> Unfortunatelly, the NodeJS tooling does not work well with symlinks or outside the root of the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the NodeJS tooling does not work well with symlinks or outside the root of the project.
```

This script proceeds in the following way:

1. Generates a vanilla project using the official Volto Yo Generator (@plone/generator-volto)

> 2. Configures is to use the add-on with the name stated in the `package.json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Configures it to use the add-on with the name stated in the `package.json`
```

3. Copies over the root of the add-on (`src` and essential files) inside the created project

After this, you can change directory to the created project, by default `addon-testing-project`.
The name of the created project is parameterizable.

After that you can use the full fledged project, and run any standard Volto command for linting, acceptance test or unit tests.

### clone (git)

> Given the add-on remote git repository it pulls and configures it into the vanilla project generated by the script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the add-on remote git repository, it pulls and configures it into the vanilla project generated by the script.
```

`npx -p @plone/scripts addon clone [options] <source> [destination]`

    Usage: addon clone [options] <source> [destination]

    clone a repository into a newly created directory

    Options:
      -p, --private          set if the repo is private, then GITHUB_TOKEN is used
      -b, --branch <branch>  set the repo branch, defaults to main
      -c, --canary           downloads latest Volto canary (alpha) version
      -h, --help             display help for command

> 

Reviewer 2: The above entire help output should be dedented and surrounded by triple backticks.

````
```console
Usage: addon clone [options] <source> [destination]
...and so on.
```
````

Author: Done

> This next command, would download the `volto-blocks-grid` add-on from its git repo, branch `main` and will generate a project with the latest Volto canary (alpha) version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This next command downloads the `volto-blocks-grid` add-on from its git repository's `main` branch, and will generate a project with the latest Volto canary (alpha) version.
```

```shell
npx -p @plone/scripts addon clone https://github.com/kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid.git --branch main --canary
```

> This will create a directory named `addon-testing-project` and will bootstrap a new project using Volto's standard project generator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will create a directory named `addon-testing-project`, and will bootstrap a new project using Volto's standard project generator.
```

> It will adjust the configuration of this project to setup the add-on in the project using `mrs-developer` and the git URL given to fetch the add-on contents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will adjust the configuration of this project to setup the add-on in the project using `mrs-developer`, and the git URL given to fetch the add-on contents.
```

You can specify the branch to be used, if the project should use the latest alpha available.

> There is an option for private repos as well, in that case, it will use the `GITHUB_TOKEN` present in your environment variables to fetch it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For private repositories, it uses the `GITHUB_TOKEN` present in your environment variables to fetch it.
```

After this, as a developer you can use the usual project commands to run tests (unit, linting, acceptance) inside the generated `addon-testing-project`.
You can configure the CI of your choice for automated testing, you can take a look at how it's done in: https://github.com/kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid/tree/main/.github/workflows

The idea is to issue commands inside the generated `addon-testing-project` project and do your checks.

> Take special care on how to pass down to the `npx` command the current PR branch depending on your CI system this might be different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take special care on how to pass down to the `npx` command the current pull request branch.
Depending on your CI system, this might be different.
```

### clone local

You can also clone the local add-on using:

```shell
npx -p @plone/scripts addon clone .
```

This only works if you execute the command from the root of your add-on directory.

### consolidate

While developing, you might have done changes inside the generated project, and you most probably want to consolidate them, back into the root of the repository.
By running this script, it copies over from `addon-testing-project/src/addons/<my-addon>` to the root of your repository.

It should be run at the root of the add-on, and it gets an optional `source` argument in case you have specified a directory other than `addon-testing-project`.

`npx -p @plone/scripts addon consolidate --help`

    Usage: addon consolidate [options] [source]

    Consolidate a cloned project

    Options:

>       -h, --help  display help for command

Reviewer 2: See above note (line 83) regarding how to put this entire help output in a `console` code block.

Author: Done

It's quite similar when you develop a Plone backend add-on in the Python side, and embed a ready to use Plone build (using buildout or pip) in order to develop and test the package.

> ```

Author: Done!
